---
title: Software Upgrade Experiences for IoT
abbrev: SUPEI
docname: draft-jimenez-supei-00
date: 2016-05-30
category: info

ipr: trust200902
area:

stand_alone: yes
pi: [toc, sortrefs, symrefs]

author:
 -
    ins: J. Jimenez
    name: Jaime Jimenez
    organization: Ericsson
    email: jaime.jimenez@ericsson.com
 -
    ins: M. Ocak
    name: Mert Ocak
    organization: Ericsson
    email: mert.ocak@ericsson.com


normative:

informative:
  RFC7252:
  RFC7230:
  I-D.ietf-core-resource-directory:
  IOTSIWS:
    title: IoT Workshop for Semantic Interoperability (IOTSI) - Main Page and Position Papers
    author: 
      org: IAB
    date: 2016
    target: https://www.iab.org/activities/workshops/iotsi/


--- abstract
This document provides a summary of found problems and possible solutions for software upgrades on the constrained space. Some of the issues are still open and should be subject of discussion. Ideally some implementation guidelines should be made when using CoAP {{RFC7252}}, HTTP {{RFC7230}} or MQTT as transfer protocols.

--- middle

Introduction
============

In this short paper we try to raise some issues we have found when dealing with software upgrades in the IoT domain. Dealing with sleepy endpoint is at {{sleepy}}. The case for device initiated communication is on {{devini}} and manager initiated on {{serverini}}. Delegation on gateways or other nodes is in {{delegation}}. The use of an alternative stack for software upgrades is at {{many}}. A possible long-term architecture that enables to do runtime updates on the constrained device is at {{run}} 

Architecture
============

Ideally our target CoAP stack is the following:


         Device                                         Manager
     +-------------------+                      +-------------------+
     |CoAP Server/Client | +----------------->  |CoAP Server/Client |
     +-------------------+                      +-------------------+
     |IPv4/IPv6 - UDP    |                      |IPv4/IPv6 - UDP    |
     +-------------------+ <-----------------+  |                   |
     |GSM/3G             |                      |                   |
     +-------------------+                      +-------------------+

This set up poses several issues when dealing with the operator environment.


**JAIME:** Could the image be improved somehow? Is it sufficient?

**MERT:** Do we really need to write GSM/3G seperately? There is only one line about it saying "it has issues". So maybe we can seperate UDP and IP layers on different horizontal lines, the classic CoAP stack diagram. 

Dealing with Sleepy endpoints {#sleepy}
=============================

The fact that devices are sleepy poses several problems for doing software updates. Namely that you do not have a connected endpoint most of the time and that therefore the device will have to contact the manager or the manager will have to poll the device pretty frequently. The case for polling does not scale and therefore it is hardly a solution. 

Nevertheless it is very common to use polling on the constrained space since the server has more capabilities and thus can query the device providing that there are no NATs or firewalls (See {{devini}})


Device Initiated Communication {#devini}
==============================

The first issue are NATs and Firewalls. Constrained devices do not have the capabilities nor the inclination to punch holes through NATs and keep them open, that task has to be delegated elsewhere. 

What we have done in order to overcome this obstacle is to set an observation on the device. Assuming that the device has previously registered on a Resource Directory (RD) {{I-D.ietf-core-resource-directory}} that the manager has access to, the manager would then observe the status of the device (0:off, 1:on). Whenever the device wakes up it will send a notification to the manager. During the time the NAT is open the manager will be able to send data through the holes in the NAT.

~~~~~~~~~~~
D<--M: CoAP GET /Radio_link_status, Token: 0x4a, Observe: 0  
D-->M: 2.05 Content, Token: 0x4a, payload: 1, time: 1464619477
D-->M: 2.05 Content, Token: 0x4a, payload: 1, time: 1464520998
~~~~~~~~~~~

Manager Initiated Communication {#serverini}
==============================
NATs and Firewalls are persistent issues to resolve also in manager initiated communication. However, we could re-use the capabilities of CoAP to overcome this issue.

In this approach, there is no need to set a separate observation on the status of the device as defined in {{devini}}. When the device sends a notification to any existing observation on any resource, the manager can initiate the software update during the established connection through NAT. This approach requires the manager to implement the logic of linking observation of any resource to send software update to the device.

Delegation on other nodes {#delegation}
=========================

Many of the IoT devices may not have connectivity to the manager and gateways are used to provide such connectivity to the manager in the e.g. core network. Gateways used in this use case are more capable to perform complex operations and to support different protocol stacks together, which can be used to update the device software. 

For our implementation we assumed that the gateway supports, at least, both CoAP and HTTP stacks. The communication between the device and the gateway is performed using CoAP. Gateway can retrieve the software update from the manager through HTTP without NAT issues and cache the downloaded package. One other way for the gateway to retrieve the software package could be to observe software update resource on the manager via CoAP observe option. The manager notifies the gateway with CoAP notifcation when there is a software update available. When the device wakes up and connects to the gateway, the gateway can push the cached software update to the device. 

However, this approach requires the Gateway to have the required credentials to perform such software update operation. This can be achieved e.g. by having a CoAP proxy on the Gateway.

Gateway retrieving software package via HTTP:
~~~~~~~~~~~
G-->M: HTTP GET /swupdate  
G<--M: 200 Content, payload: swpackage
D<--G: COAP POST /sw, Token: 0xbb, payload: swpackage
~~~~~~~~~~~

Gateway retrieving software package via CoAP Observe option:
~~~~~~~~~~~
G-->M: COAP GET /swupdate, Token: 0x6a, Observe: 0  
G<--M: 2.05 Content, Token: 0x6a, payload: swpackage
D<--G: COAP POST /sw, Token: 0xbb, payload: swpackage
~~~~~~~~~~~

**JAIME:** Could you add an example here? Some sequence diagram as in {{devini}}, code sniplet...

**MERT:** Added two examples, have a look. Especially what could be the sw update URI on the device?

Using Multiple Stacks {#many}
=====================

We have seen how in some cases devices have multiple stack combinations and updates go through an "alternative channel". For example:

MQTT+HTTP
: in this scenario MQTT is used as the base protocol for communication. Having publish/subscribe architecture simplifies the (1:n) and (n:1) communication use cases that are very common for reporting sensor data. For firmware upgrades a command is sent to the device with the URL where the new binaries are (i.e. https://company/devicetype/version00.zip), the device then sets a whole different communication channel just for that, as well as a dedicated DTLS/TLS connection. This is too much overhead for many constrained devices. 

**JAIME:** We need another example here, any ideas?. 

**MERT:** What about using CoAP+MQTT? MQTT indicates there is a software update and the client retrieves it with CoAP?

Possible DDOS
==============

TBD

**JAIME:** When I thought of software update issues, I firstly thought of DDoS generated by the billions of devices on the CDN hosting the updates. So I am wondering if that is a non issue? 

**MERT:** Isn't software update server controlled i.e. how would DDOS work if server already controls the update process? I mean, e.g. can a device request its software to be updated from the server? 

**JAIME:** I guess the point here is if there are some issues with updating ALL devices at once, specially if there are billions of them... anyway we could remove this part cause I am not sure about its usefullness.

**MERT:** Then in that case, software update is released by the server in cycles i.e. not billions at a time but thousands at a time for a period of time. So, the server still balances its load itself. I also think we could remove this part, not very relevant.

Runtime Discovery {#run}
=================

Instead of sending bulk binaries with several megabytes of data, a simpler approach would be to send partial modifications related to the software update when possible. 

Similarly as it was shown in the IOTSI Workshop {{IOTSIWS}}, Runtime Discovery is also a very powerful mechanism to provide updated services and software to a device.

A device could use a single entry point for its firmware information (e.g. "/fw"), then device would periodically perform discovery on that point and in order to discover new capabilities. Links to the new capabilities could be discoverable on demand. Only very basic semantics would be shared a-priori.

Current software upgrade mechanism do not allow for changes at runtime. There are predefined interfaces that would break whenever the API changes, making it compulsory to send new software to the device that would need to install it, reboot, etc. The device logic has to support such interfaces, no changes are possible at runtime. 


Acknowledgements
=================

Runtime Discovery ideas are inspired from Matthias Kovatsch's presentations on HATEOAS at {{IOTSIWS}}. Thanks to Carsten Bormann for the valuable feedback.

